#LyX 2.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 474
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage[font=small,labelfont=bf]{caption}

\newcommand*\name[1]{#1}                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
\newcommand*\abbrv[1]{#1}                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
\newcommand*\rpkg[1]{\textit{#1}}                                                                                                                                                                                                              
\newcommand*\file[1]{\textit{#1}}                                                                                                                                                                                                              
\newcommand{\code}[1]{\texttt{#1}}                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
\newcommand*\protein[1]{#1}                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
\newcommand*\gene[1]{\textit{#1}}                                                                                                                                                                                                              
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language british
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_math auto
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Abstract
The explanation of phenotypes in cancer, such as cell line drug response
 or patient survival, has largely been focussed on genomic alterations (SNPs,
 CNVs, and structural variations).
 While this approach has generated many profound insights into cancer biology,
 it does not directly make statements about the signaling impact those cellular
 aberrations create.
 With direct measurements much less widely available than gene expression,
 pathway methods (mostly mapping gene expression onto signalling proteins)
 have so far fallen short on delivering actionable evidence.
 This can be due in part to lack of robustness, however, these approaches
 are fundamentally at odds with the notion of tight post-translational control
 of signal transduction.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
As a baseline (chapter 2), I investigated how well pathway methods compare
 to driver mutations in terms of explaining cell line drug response.
 I went on to analyse the value of mRNA as a downstream signature of signaling
 activity instead of mapping it to the pathway components by means of the
 previously published SPEED platform.
 With minor necessary modifications, this improved over mapping pathway
 members using Gene Ontology or Reactome, but it considered only sets of
 up-regulated genes defined by multiple arbitrary cutoffs.
 Hence, I created a new platform based on a linear model of pathway-responsive
 genes (chapter 3) and found that it compares favourably to gene set as
 well as state of the art pathway methods in terms of recovering driver
 mutations, cell line drug response, and patient survival (chapter 4).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Finally, I investigate how gene expression signatures of drugs can be used
 in conjunction with viability data to suggest effective treatment combinations
 (chapter 5).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
To the best of my knowledge, this thesis represents the first comprehensive
 analysis of different pathway methods across primary cohorts and cancer
 cell lines, as well as the first large-scale systematic analysis of drug
 sensitisation that could lead to new drug combinations.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
