#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble
\usepackage[font=small,labelfont=bf]{caption}

\newcommand*\name[1]{#1}                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
\newcommand*\abbrv[1]{#1}                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
\newcommand*\rpkg[1]{\textit{#1}}                                                                                                                                                                                                              
\newcommand*\file[1]{\textit{#1}}                                                                                                                                                                                                              
\newcommand{\code}[1]{\texttt{#1}}                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
\newcommand*\protein[1]{#1}                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
\newcommand*\gene[1]{\textit{#1}}                                                                                                                                                                                                              
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language british
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Part
Conclusions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Signalling pathways have long been studied in the context of cancer as well
 as other diseases.
 Because direct measurements of those are not widely available, significant
 effort has been devoted to extracting predictive and reliable biomarkers
 reflecting their status from gene expression data.
 This has either been done by mapping the expression level of pathway components
, or by defining signature genes that differentiate between two conditions.
 In this thesis, I have shown the utility and robustness of gene expression
 signatures for inferring signalling activity as well as potential drug
 combinations.
 I started with characterising the GDSC cancer cell line panel using gene
 sets of Gene Ontology categories and Reactome pathways.
 I showed that one needs to be cautious when interpreting the top associations
 with drug response, as the process depicted will often likely not be the
 process that causes sensitivity to resistance to a given drug.
 As a way to solve this, I showed the advantage of pre-selecting interesting
 gene sets that are changing upon pathway stimulation using the SPEED platform
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Parikh2010-uj"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I assembled a comprehensive and robust set of consensus gene expression
 signatures derived from pathway perturbations, which enabled me to detect
 pathway-specific footprints of signalling activity.
 I provided the first large-scale comparison between these signatures and
 state of the art pathway methods in both patient data and pharmacogenomic
 drug screenings (The Cancer Genome Atlas and Sanger’s Genomics of Drug
 Sensitivity in Cancer, respectively).
 I found that consensus signatures of perturbations better recover many
 well-known driver mutations in terms of their expected impact on pathway
 activity, provide more associations with drug response than driver mutations,
 and more clearly distinguish between oncogenic and tumor-suppressive pathways
 for patient survival.
 Furthermore, I showed that my signatures can be used in combinations with
 driver mutations to yield better biomarkers for drug indications than mutations
 alone.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
I showed that the same signatures, computed per drug in the LINCS Connectivity
 Map can be used to predict synergistic and antagonistic drug combinations
 using signature matching in conjunction with drug sensitivity data.
 I developed a novel way of computing those associations while taking into
 account possible pathway cross-talk between the two drugs.
 While the experimental validation remains to be confirmed, literature evidence
 strongly supported the validity of this approach.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On the technical side, the signatures I have worked with were largely based
 z-score coefficients of linear models and not gene sets and GSEA.
 While GSEA has been applied to virtually every possible biological context
 and we know very well how it behaves (in terms of distribution of scores,
 appropriate null models, continuous unimodal scores in GSVA, leading edge
 analysis, etc.).
 However, the overall knowledge and possibilities of linear models reach
 far beyond what is possible with GSEA.
 Adding a covariate to signature matching is just one example of that.
 It is my impression that those kinds of models will expand again from ANOVAs,
 Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) and eQTLs (genomic variants with
 impact on gene expression, or expression quantitative trait loci) more
 into generally applicable analyses of gene expression, because it enables
 to used to apply many more techniques and tools to solve problems such
 as confounding variables, batch correction, latent variable extraction,
 etc.
 A good example of a tool that performs theses tasks is PEER 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "Stegle2012-ds"

\end_inset

, used to regress out known and unknown covariates for genomic associations,
 while finding correlated latent variables to explain phenotypes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On the biological side, I expect the signatures I derived (both for pathways
 and for individual drugs) to in the future be used as tools to interrogate
 the functional impact of mutations, as well as inference of signalling
 activity from gene expression for other purposes.
 As I addressed the issues of post-translational control that common pathway
 methods do not take into account as well as the context-specificity of
 single-condition signatures, I believe that those signatures (again, both
 for pathways and individual drugs) can in the future be used in the pre-clinica
l as well as clinical setting either as biomarkers for drug indication or
 patient survival, but also as tools to interrogate the basic biology that
 drives those processes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "references"
options "plain"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
